Restructured Ch 5 & added more images (#4)
NCEAS/scalable-computing-course: sections/05-adc-data-publishing.qmd

title: "Documenting and Publishing Data"
---

> TODO: UPDATE ATTRIBUTE-WALKTHROUGH IMAGES TO REFLECT A NETCDF FILE OR SIMILAR

Reviewer: I don't think this is really necessary. If I were you I would get the ones from this version: https://learning.nceas.ucsb.edu/2022-02-arctic/documenting-and-publishing-data.html#publishing-data-from-the-web

Author: I already have those in there except for I think 1 image, I'll switch it out. Thought netCDF might be better but i'm happy to just use the other images

These data repositories all assign a unique identifier to ***every version*** of every data file, similarly to how it works with source code commits in GitHub. Those identifiers usually take one of two forms. A DOI (digital object identifier) identifier is often assigned to the metadata and becomes the publicly citable identifier for the package. Each of the other files gets a global identifier, often a UUID (universally unique identifier) that is globally unique. In the example above, the package can be cited with the DOI [`doi:10.5063/F1F18WN4`](@https://knb.ecoinformatics.org/view/doi:10.5063/F1F18WN4), and each of the individual files have their own identifiers as well.

## Archiving Data: The Large Data Perspective

> There are two components to any data package archived with the Arctic Data Center: the metadata & the data themselves. Data can be images, plain text documents, tabular data, spatial data, scripts used to analyze the data, a readme file, and more. To the best of your ability, please make sure that the data uploaded are in an open format, rather than proprietary. This means uploading a `.pdf` rather than a `.docx` file, or `.csv` rather than `.xlsx`. That being said, we understand that this is not always possible or reasonable for users, as is the case sometimes if they've used ESRI products rather than QGIS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two components to any data package archived with the Arctic Data Center: the metadata & the data themselves. Data can be images, plain text documents, tabular data, spatial data, scripts used to analyze the data, a readme file, and more. To the best of your ability, please make sure that the data uploaded are in an open format, rather than proprietary format. We strongly recommend using open, self-documenting binary formats for large data archival. NetCDF, HDF, .mat (v7.3) and Parquet files are all examples of "self-documenting" files. In the case of a NetCDF file, users can input the attribute name, attribute description, missing value codes, units, and more into the file itself. When these data are well-documented within themselves, it can save the time when users submit their data to us, since the documentation for variable level information is already mostly complete. We'll discuss NetCDF and metadata more in Session 8. For geospatial data, we recommend using geotiff for raster files, and geopackage files for vector files.
```

-   attribute name (for programs)

-   attribute label (for display)

![](../images/editor-19-socialsci.png)

-   variable definition (be specific)

-   type of measurement

![](../images/editor-20-socialsci.png)

-   units & code definitions

![](../images/editor-21-socialsci.png)

Users will need to add these definitions for every variable (column) in the file. When done, click **Done**. Now, the list of data files will show a green checkbox indicating that you have fully described that file's internal structure. Proceed with documenting other unique file types, and then click **Save Dataset** to save all of these changes.

::: callout-tip
When dealing with large datasets, the Data Team can help users fill out metadata for similar file types with identical internal structures. An example of this will be discussed in the Best Practices section.
:::

![](../images/editor-23-socialsci.png)

After you get the big green success message, you can visit your dataset and review all of the information that you provided. If you find any errors, simply click **Edit** again to make changes.

### Step 3: Uploading Large Data

> In order to submit your large data files to the Arctic Data Center repository, we encourage users to directly upload their data to the Data Team's servers using a secure file transfer protocol (FTP). Our team uses and recommends the free program [Cyberduck](https://cyberduck.io/download/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to submit your large data files to the Arctic Data Center repository, we encourage users to directly upload their data to the Data Team's servers using a secure file transfer protocol (SFTP). There are a number of GUI driven and command line programs out there that all work well. For a GUI program, our team uses and recommends the free program [Cyberduck](https://cyberduck.io/download/). We will discuss command line programs in Session 18 in more detail, including `rsync` and Globus.
```

> Before you can upload your data to the Data Team's server, make sure to email us at `support@arcticdata.io` to retrieve the login password. Once you have that, you can proceed through the following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second question is, under what circumstances should I consider uploading data directly to the server, versus the webform? Although server uploads are more efficient for large datasets, for smaller datasets it is much more efficient to go through the webform. So, what constitutes a large dataset and what tools should you consider? Here is a helpful diagram:

Before you can upload your data to the Data Team's server, make sure to email us at `support@arcticdata.io` to retrieve the login password. Once you have that, you can proceed through the following steps.
```

::: callout-note
Please note, if you have data nearing the petabyte scale, it may be best to arrange a shipment of an external hard drive.
:::

> When you start Cyberduck, you should see a screen similar to the image below.

Reviewer: I think we should remove the explicit Cyberduck instructions - save them for the training manual though

Author: Yes, I have the cyberduck stuff copied to a totally different qmd file. I kept it in because I wasn't sure if there was any language at the beginning I wanted to retain, but I will remove all the cyberduck instructions

Once you have finished uploading your data to our servers, please let the Data Team know via email so that we can continue associate your uploaded data with your metadata submission.

As mentioned in [Step 1: The Narrative Metadata Submission] section above, when the data package is finalized and made public, there will be a sentence in the abstract that directs users to a separate page where your data will live. The following image is an example of where the data from [this](https://arcticdata.io/catalog/view/doi%3A10.18739%2FA2CV4BS5K) dataset live.

![](../images/large-data-package.png)

## Best Practices for Submitting Large Data

### Data Organization

> The data archival process is much smoother when users already have a well structured and organized file management system. As we are at the end of the research life cycle for many users, we understand that you may not already have a well organized file system. In cases such as these, we recommend organizing your data as much as possible ***before*** upload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data archival process is much smoother when users already have a well structured and organized file management system. We strongly recommend starting to work with the Arctic Data Center towards the beginning of your project, instead of the very end. Our curation team can help you publish your data faster, and more smoothly, the earlier you talk to us. Regardless of where you are in your project, however, considering your organization strategy is best done ***before*** data upload.
```

> Take a look at this recently made [data portal](https://arcticdata.io/catalog/portals/AIS). Originally, this user had only submitted the last listed dataset. That dataset contains over 700 rasters and shapefiles depicting vessel paths in the North Pacific at many different resolutions. Upon review, the submitter determined that it would be best if other users could download the data at specific resolution scales in addition to the whole collection of data. By creating separate datasets at the resolution scale, this user was able to organize their data in a structured way that makes it easy for future researchers to use their data. Furthermore, the user was able to house their related datasets under one roof using our portal system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take a look at this recently made [data portal](https://arcticdata.io/catalog/portals/AIS). Originally, this user had only submitted one dataset with all of her files (over 700, at varying resolutions). The data contain rasters and shapefiles depicting vessel paths in the North Pacific at many different resolutions. Upon review, the submitter and curation team together determined that it would be best if other users could download the data at specific resolution scales. As a solution, we created separate datasets according to resolution and data type. With the addition of the data portal, the user was able to house their related datasets at a single URL, which allows for search and discovery within only the datasets for that project.
```

::: callout-note
To find out more about portals, visit <https://arcticdata.io/data-portals/>. You can view our catalog of portals [here](https://arcticdata.io/catalog/portals). We recommend reviewing the Distributed Biological Observatory's [portal](https://arcticdata.io/catalog/portals/DBO) to see what a more fleshed out portal can look like.
:::

![](../images/kapsar-portal.png)

> This example also illustrates that users can create multiple datasets for a single NSF award. It's understandable that you may think you have to submit all your data for a given award under one dataset. However, we encourage you to be flexible in how you approach archiving and organizing your data with us as this user has been.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example also illustrates that users can create multiple datasets for a single NSF award. It's understandable that you may think you have to submit all your data for a given award under one dataset. However, we think breaking up data into separate datasets (in logical, structured ways) increases the discoverability and usability of the data. This is especially true when users also create a data portal for their project.
```

> When uploading your data files using SFTP, either through the command line or a GUI, we recommend creating folders with the same name as your dataset's title so that it is easier to associate the data with their associated metadata submission.

Reviewer: I feel mixed about whether to keep this tip or not. maybe add it to the callout below

Author: Info's been moved into the below callout

::: callout-tip
For more complex folder structures, it is wise to include a README file that explicitly walks users through the structure and provides a basic understanding of what is available. Generally speaking, we recommend structuring your data in an easy to understand way such that a README isn't completely necessary.
:::

### Self-Documenting Files

> NetCDF, .hdf, and .mat file types are all examples of "self-documenting" files. In the case of a NetCDF file, users can input the attribute name, attribute description, missing value codes, units, and more into the file itself. When these data are well-documented within themselves, it can save the user's time when they go to submit their data with us.

Reviewer: remove this section, and add a summary instead. I'm moving this content up higher in the lesson and rewriting slightly

Author: added summary section and removed above info
